We're going to step up the Acuity and talk about ventricular tachycardia
Which are often life-threatening and can cause sudden cardiac death
As stated previously atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are separated based on the width of the QRS complex
Atrial arrhythmias connect to the native conduction system
Cosmic crisp QRS interval
Ventricular arrhythmias do not connect to the native conduction system
And the impulses travel slowly being my site to my site spread
So the QRS is widened
What start with premature ventricular contractions or PVC
Which occur when an irritable Focus within the ventricle gets excited and spontaneously fires
The PVC is not related to an atrial impulse
So the QRS has no preceding P wave
The impulse
Spread slowly throughout the ventricles which causes an abnormally wide QRS complex
With high amplitude
PVC typically have the opposite polarity compared to the normal surrounding QRS complexes
Let's take a look at this example which has three obvious PVCs
There certainly wide complexes with high amplitudes
And they lack preceding P wave
The polarities opposite from the surrounding complex
For example in lead avf the QRS complexes are mostly negative but the PVC is positive
1 of ventricular Focus fires it spreads in all directions throughout the ventricles
So you can use your knowledge of vectors and leave to determine the location of the abnormal Focus
In this example the PVC is positive in the inferior leads
So we know that is originating in the superior portion of the ventricles and is spreading inferior Li
Towards those weeds
The answer Leeds
Have a positive deflection in the left lateral leads have a negative deflection
So we can infer that this PVC originated in the left posterior Superior region of the ventricles
And it's spreading right word
Anteriorly and inferiorly
If the impulse starts in the left ventricle and spreads to the right ventricle
It is as if the right bundle branch is blocked
And the QRS complex can have a right bundle branch block pattern
The opposite is also true
A PVC originating in the right ventricle will show a left bundle branch block pattern
When every other beat is a PVC that is termed bigeminy
When every third beat is a PVC that is called trigeminy
This should not be confused with couplets which are two consecutive PVCs
Or triplets Witcher 3 consecutive PVCs
PVCs are very common even healthy patients
May have no significance at all
Typically
Are not noticed by the patient
However increasingly frequent PVCs can be a sign of underlying heart disease and may warrant further investigation
In addition frequent PVCs can deteriorate into v-tach which will talk about next
Although PVCs are mainly asymptomatic
Some patients may experience palpitations
Interesting lie they do not feel a palpitation with the PVC
But instead patient fulfill palpitation with the following be
What's separate atrial activity and ventricular activity
As the PVC is firing
The SA node is also firing an Impulse throughout the Atria
This causes the P wave to be buried within the PVC
When the atrial impulse reaches the ventricles the ventricles are still refractory from the PVC
So the atrial impulse is extinguished
After that there's a compensatory pause
To wait for the next P wave to activate the ventricles
During this pause there's increase time for ventricular filling
Or preload so the following beat has an increased stroke volume
The compensatory pause
Plus the increase stroke volume of the following deed is experienced as a palpitation
These patients should be reassured that occasional PVCs are harmless
But if the palpitations are bothersome
Treatment with beta blockers can decrease their frequency
Ventricular tachycardia is defined as three or more PVCs in a row
It will appear as a ventricular arrhythmia meaning of wide QRS and the absence of p waves
With a rate of 120 to 200 beats per minute
Hey usually indicates a significant underlying heart disease and can be caused by ischemia infarction
Heart failure
Ventricular hypertrophy
Congenital diseases
And valvular disease
Vtac is divided into two categories
Sustained v-tach and non sustained v-tach
If the arrhythmia last more than 30 seconds causes severe symptoms or requires treatment
To terminate it
Did it meets criteria for sustained v-tach
If it lasts less than 30 seconds and resolve on its own without intervention
Then it is labeled non sustained v-tach
Non sustained v-tach is usually asymptomatic and may not need any treatment
Music is further categorized
Buy QRS morphology
Monomorphic v-tach means that each QRS complex looks similar
And is typically caused by scar from a myocardial infarction that is cause re-entry circuit within the ventricle
Polymorphic v-tach means that the QRS complexes are changing any regular
And it is typically caused by multiple ectopic foci
Usually due to acute ischemia or infarction
Sustained polymorphic v-tach is extremely dangerous as it will usually degenerate into v-fib which is fatal without me
Media treatment
Take a look at this ECG
It shows frequent PVCs that degenerate into monomorphic v-tach
It may look chaotic but hopefully you can appreciate that it is tachycardia with wide QRS complexes
The symptoms of v-tach very and range from palpitations to pulmonary edema to syncope to cardiac arrest
The degree of symptoms depends on the rate
If the arrhythmia is so rapid that the ventricles don't have time to fill
Stroke volume will plummet and cardiac output will not be sufficient to maintain blood pressure and perfusion of vital organs
Symptoms are also determined by the underlying condition of the heart
Treatment depends on the severity
If a patient loses their pulse
Then you must go through the ACLS algorithm
Which includes CPR and defibrillation along with epinephrine and amiodarone
This algorithm does not change if the VTEC deteriorates into v-fib as long as pulses are apps
If the patient is hemodynamically stable consider synchronized cardioversion or treatment with anti-arrhythmic medications
Such as amiodarone procainamide or sotalol
If a patient of successfully resuscitated
The underlying cause should be investigated
If the patient is deemed to be high risk for recurrence
They should have an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator or ICD
Inserted
Torsades
Which translates to twisting of the points
Is a type of polymorphic v-tach in which the amplitude of the QRS complex is very
It is due to irritable ventricular Foci that are competing
From this example maybe you can see why it is described as a twisting of the QRS complexes around the Baseline
You can see the amplitude shrinking smaller and smaller and then growing larger and larger again
The most important risk factor for torsades is a prolonged QT interval
Which has many potential causes
Congenital Long QT syndrome
Aware mutations in the genes coding for sodium and potassium channels
Cause of prolonged action potential which causes a prolonged QT interval
Electrolyte abnormalities such as hypokalemia hypocalcemia and importantly hypomagnesemia
Can all cause a prolonged QT interval
Many medications can cause a prolonged QT interval and I like to use the mnemonic A B C D and E
A stands for anti-arrhythmic
Specifically classes 1A & 3
B stands for antibiotics
Especially macrolide
C stands for antipsychotics such as haloperidol
D stands for antidepressants such as tcas
Citalopram and escitalopram and Venlafaxine
Annie stands for antiemetics such as ondansetron Zofran
So imagine your patient has depression with psychotic features
Treated with an antidepressant and antipsychotic
In all comes into the Eda with an infection and you treat him with azithromycin a macrolide antibiotic
Then he complained of nausea and you reflexively order small densitron
Now he's on for medications that prolong the QT interval and he's at risk of torsades
Torsades by itself is usually symptomatic with lightheadedness and syncope
The real danger of torsades is potential degeneration into v-fib
Which is a life-threatening condition
Treatment involves correcting the underlying cause
Such an electrolyte replace
Magnesium sulfate should also be used even if the patient has a normal magnesium level
And ICD should be placed in patients at risk of repeated torsades
Such as those with congenital Long QT syndrome
Finally we come to v-fib
The most dangerous arrhythmia
Multiple irritable ventricular Foci compete
And the result of the loss of coordinated ventricular contraction
This causes rapid cessation
Cardiac output
And death unless promptly treated
It is often preceded by VTech that degenerates interview favor rest
The ECG looks chaotic
With no identifiable QRS wave forms as seen in this example
Treatment of CPR and defibrillation
While trying to correct any underlying cause
Anti-arrhythmic medications can be used in the immediate. To prevent recurrence